
--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---
This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	either	are	the	product	of	the	author’s	imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously.	Any	resemblance	to	actual
persons,	living	or	dead,	events,	or	locales	is	entirely	coincidental.
Copyright	©	2011,	2014	by	Andy	Weir
All	rights	reserved.
Published	in	the	United	States	by	Crown	Publishers,	an	imprint	of	the	Crown	Publishing	Group,	a	division	of	Random	House	LLC,	a	Penguin	Random	House	Company,	New
York.
www.crownpublishing.com
CROWN	and	the	Crown	colophon	are	registered	trademarks	of	Random	House	LLC.
Originally	self-published,	in	different	form,	as	an	ebook	in	2011.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	data	is	available	upon	request.
ISBN	9780804139021
eBook	ISBN:	9780804139038
Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America
Book	design	by	Elizabeth	Rendfleisch
Map	by	Fred	Haynes
Photograph	by	Antonio	M.	Rosario/Stockbyte/Getty	Images
Jacket	design	by	Eric	White
Jacket	photograph	(astronaut):	NASA
ep_v4.0
--- Page 4 ---
For	Mom,
who	calls	me	“Pickle,”
and	Dad,
who	calls	me	“Dude.”
--- Page 5 ---

--- Page 6 ---

--- Page 7 ---

--- Page 8 ---
Contents
Cover
Title	Page
Copyright
Dedication
Map
Chapter	1
Chapter	2
Chapter	3
Chapter	4
Chapter	5
Chapter	6
Chapter	7
Chapter	8
Chapter	9
Chapter	10
Chapter	11
Chapter	12
Chapter	13
Chapter	14
Chapter	15
Chapter	16
Chapter	17
Chapter	18
Chapter	19
Chapter	20
Chapter	21
Chapter	22
Chapter	23
Chapter	24
Chapter	25
Chapter	26
--- Page 9 ---
CHAPTER	1
--- Page 10 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	6
I’m	pretty	much	fucked.
That’s	my	considered	opinion.
Fucked.
Six	days	into	what	should	be	the	greatest	two	months	of	my	life,	and	it’s	turned	into	a	nightmare.
I	don’t	even	know	who’ll	read	this.	I	guess	someone	will	find	it	eventually.	Maybe	a	hundred	years
from	now.
For	the	record…I	didn’t	die	on	Sol	6.	Certainly	the	rest	of	the	crew	thought	I	did,	and	I	can’t	blame
them.	Maybe	there’ll	be	a	day	of	national	mourning	for	me,	and	my	Wikipedia	page	will	say,	“Mark
Watney	is	the	only	human	being	to	have	died	on	Mars.”
And	it’ll	be	right,	probably.	’Cause	I’ll	surely	die	here.	Just	not	on	Sol	6	when	everyone	thinks	I
did.
Let’s	see…where	do	I	begin?
The	Ares	Program.	Mankind	reaching	out	to	Mars	to	send	people	to	another	planet	for	the	very
first	time	and	expand	the	horizons	of	humanity	blah,	blah,	blah.	The	Ares	1	crew	did	their	thing	and
came	back	heroes.	They	got	the	parades	and	fame	and	love	of	the	world.
Ares	2	did	the	same	thing,	in	a	different	location	on	Mars.	They	got	a	firm	handshake	and	a	hot	cup
of	coffee	when	they	got	home.
Ares	3.	Well,	that	was	my	mission.	Okay,	not	
mine
	per	se.	Commander	Lewis	was	in	charge.	I	was
just	one	of	her	crew.	Actually,	I	was	the	very	lowest	ranked	member	of	the	crew.	I	would	only	be	“in
command”	of	the	mission	if	I	were	the	only	remaining	person.
What	do	you	know?	I’m	in	command.
I	wonder	if	this	log	will	be	recovered	before	the	rest	of	the	crew	die	of	old	age.	I	presume	they	got
back	to	Earth	all	right.	Guys,	if	you’re	reading	this:	It	wasn’t	your	fault.	You	did	what	you	had	to	do.
In	your	position	I	would	have	done	the	same	thing.	I	don’t	blame	you,	and	I’m	glad	you	survived.
I	guess	I	should	explain	how	Mars	missions	work,	for	any	layman	who	may	be	reading	this.	We	got	to
Earth	orbit	the	normal	way,	through	an	ordinary	ship	to	
Hermes
.	All	the	Ares	missions	use	
Hermes
	to
get	to	and	from	Mars.	It’s	really	big	and	cost	a	lot	so	NASA	built	only	one.
Once	we	got	to	
Hermes
,	four	additional	unmanned	missions	brought	us	fuel	and	supplies	while	we
prepared	for	our	trip.	Once	everything	was	a	go,	we	set	out	for	Mars.	But	not	very	fast.	Gone	are	the
days	of	heavy	chemical	fuel	burns	and	trans-Mars	injection	orbits.
Hermes
	is	powered	by	ion	engines.	They	throw	argon	out	the	back	of	the	ship	really	fast	to	get	a
tiny	amount	of	acceleration.	The	thing	is,	it	doesn’t	take	much	reactant	mass,	so	a	little	argon	(and	a
nuclear	reactor	to	power	things)	let	us	accelerate	constantly	the	whole	way	there.	You’d	be	amazed	at
how	fast	you	can	get	going	with	a	tiny	acceleration	over	a	long	time.
I	could	regale	you	with	tales	of	how	we	had	great	fun	on	the	trip,	but	I	won’t.	I	don’t	feel	like
reliving	it	right	now.	Suffice	it	to	say	we	got	to	Mars	124	days	later	without	strangling	each	other.
From	there,	we	took	the	MDV	(Mars	descent	vehicle)	to	the	surface.	The	MDV	is	basically	a	big
can	with	some	light	thrusters	and	parachutes	attached.	Its	sole	purpose	is	to	get	six	humans	from	Mars
orbit	to	the	surface	without	killing	any	of	them.
And	now	we	come	to	the	real	trick	of	Mars	exploration:	having	all	of	our	shit	there	in	advance.
A	total	of	fourteen	unmanned	missions	deposited	everything	we	would	need	for	surface	operations.
They	tried	their	best	to	land	all	the	supply	vessels	in	the	same	general	area,	and	did	a	reasonably	good
--- Page 11 ---
job.	Supplies	aren’t	nearly	so	fragile	as	humans	and	can	hit	the	ground	really	hard.	But	they	tend	to
bounce	around	a	lot.
Naturally,	they	didn’t	send	us	to	Mars	until	they’d	confirmed	that	all	the	supplies	had	made	it	to	the
surface	and	their	containers	weren’t	breached.	Start	to	finish,	including	supply	missions,	a	Mars
mission	takes	about	three	years.	In	fact,	there	were	Ares	3	supplies	en	route	to	Mars	while	the	Ares	2
crew	were	on	their	way	home.
The	most	important	piece	of	the	advance	supplies,	of	course,	was	the	MAV.	The	Mars	ascent
vehicle.	That	was	how	we	would	get	back	to	
Hermes
	after	surface	operations	were	complete.	The
MAV	was	soft-landed	(as	opposed	to	the	balloon	bounce-fest	the	other	supplies	had).	Of	course,	it	was
in	constant	communication	with	Houston,	and	if	there	had	been	any	problems	with	it,	we	would	have
passed	by	Mars	and	gone	home	without	ever	landing.
The	MAV	is	pretty	cool.	Turns	out,	through	a	neat	set	of	chemical	reactions	with	the	Martian
atmosphere,	for	every	kilogram	of	hydrogen	you	bring	to	Mars,	you	can	make	thirteen	kilograms	of
fuel.	It’s	a	slow	process,	though.	It	takes	twenty-four	months	to	fill	the	tank.	That’s	why	they	sent	it
long	before	we	got	here.
You	can	imagine	how	disappointed	I	was	when	I	discovered	the	MAV	was	gone.
It	was	a	ridiculous	sequence	of	events	that	led	to	me	almost	dying,	and	an	even	more	ridiculous
sequence	that	led	to	me	surviving.
The	mission	is	designed	to	handle	sandstorm	gusts	up	to	150	kph.	So	Houston	got	understandably
nervous	when	we	got	whacked	with	175	kph	winds.	We	all	got	in	our	flight	space	suits	and	huddled	in
the	middle	of	the	Hab,	just	in	case	it	lost	pressure.	But	the	Hab	wasn’t	the	problem.
The	MAV	is	a	spaceship.	It	has	a	lot	of	delicate	parts.	It	can	put	up	with	storms	to	a	certain	extent,
but	it	can’t	just	get	sandblasted	forever.	After	an	hour	and	a	half	of	sustained	wind,	NASA	gave	the
order	to	abort.	Nobody	wanted	to	stop	a	monthlong	mission	after	only	six	days,	but	if	the	MAV	took
any	more	punishment,	we’d	all	have	gotten	stranded	down	there.
We	had	to	go	out	in	the	storm	to	get	from	the	Hab	to	the	MAV.	That	was	going	to	be	risky,	but	what
choice	did	we	have?
Everyone	made	it	but	me.
Our	main	communications	dish,	which	relayed	signals	from	the	Hab	to	
Hermes
,	acted	like	a
parachute,	getting	torn	from	its	foundation	and	carried	with	the	torrent.	Along	the	way,	it	crashed
through	the	reception	antenna	array.	Then	one	of	those	long	thin	antennae	slammed	into	me	end-first.
It	tore	through	my	suit	like	a	bullet	through	butter,	and	I	felt	the	worst	pain	of	my	life	as	it	ripped	open
my	side.	I	vaguely	remember	having	the	wind	knocked	out	of	me	(pulled	out	of	me,	really)	and	my
ears	popping	painfully	as	the	pressure	of	my	suit	escaped.
The	last	thing	I	remember	was	seeing	Johanssen	hopelessly	reaching	out	toward	me.
I	awoke	to	the	oxygen	alarm	in	my	suit.	A	steady,	obnoxious	beeping	that	eventually	roused	me	from
a	deep	and	profound	desire	to	just	fucking	die.
The	storm	had	abated;	I	was	facedown,	almost	totally	buried	in	sand.	As	I	groggily	came	to,	I
wondered	why	I	wasn’t	more	dead.
The	antenna	had	enough	force	to	punch	through	the	suit	and	my	side,	but	it	had	been	stopped	by	my
pelvis.	So	there	was	only	one	hole	in	the	suit	(and	a	hole	in	me,	of	course).
I	had	been	knocked	back	quite	a	ways	and	rolled	down	a	steep	hill.	Somehow	I	landed	facedown,
which	forced	the	antenna	to	a	strongly	oblique	angle	that	put	a	lot	of	torque	on	the	hole	in	the	suit.	It
--- Page 12 ---
made	a	weak	seal.
Then,	the	copious	blood	from	my	wound	trickled	down	toward	the	hole.	As	the	blood	reached	the
site	of	the	breach,	the	water	in	it	quickly	evaporated	from	the	airflow	and	low	pressure,	leaving	a
gunky	residue	behind.	More	blood	came	in	behind	it	and	was	also	reduced	to	gunk.	Eventually,	it
sealed	the	gaps	around	the	hole	and	reduced	the	leak	to	something	the	suit	could	counteract.
The	suit	did	its	job	admirably.	Sensing	the	drop	in	pressure,	it	constantly	flooded	itself	with	air
from	my	nitrogen	tank	to	equalize.	Once	the	leak	became	manageable,	it	only	had	to	trickle	new	air	in
slowly	to	relieve	the	air	lost.
After	a	while,	the	CO
2
	(carbon	dioxide)	absorbers	in	the	suit	were	expended.	That’s	really	the
limiting	factor	to	life	support.	Not	the	amount	of	oxygen	you	bring	with	you,	but	the	amount	of	CO
2
you	can	remove.	In	the	Hab,	I	have	the	oxygenator,	a	large	piece	of	equipment	that	breaks	apart	CO
2
to	give	the	oxygen	back.	But	the	space	suits	have	to	be	portable,	so	they	use	a	simple	chemical
absorption	process	with	expendable	filters.	I’d	been	asleep	long	enough	that	my	filters	were	useless.
The	suit	saw	this	problem	and	moved	into	an	emergency	mode	the	engineers	call	“bloodletting.”
Having	no	way	to	separate	out	the	CO
2
,	the	suit	deliberately	vented	air	to	the	Martian	atmosphere,	then
backfilled	with	nitrogen.	Between	the	breach	and	the	bloodletting,	it	quickly	ran	out	of	nitrogen.	All	it
had	left	was	my	oxygen	tank.
So	it	did	the	only	thing	it	could	to	keep	me	alive.	It	started	backfilling	with	pure	oxygen.	I	now
risked	dying	from	oxygen	toxicity,	as	the	excessively	high	amount	of	oxygen	threatened	to	burn	up
my	nervous	system,	lungs,	and	eyes.	An	ironic	death	for	someone	with	a	leaky	space	suit:	too	much
oxygen.
Every	step	of	the	way	would	have	had	beeping	alarms,	alerts,	and	warnings.	But	it	was	the	high-
oxygen	warning	that	woke	me.
The	sheer	volume	of	training	for	a	space	mission	is	astounding.	I’d	spent	a	week	back	on	Earth
practicing	emergency	space	suit	drills.	I	knew	what	to	do.
Carefully	reaching	to	the	side	of	my	helmet,	I	got	the	breach	kit.	It’s	nothing	more	than	a	funnel
with	a	valve	at	the	small	end	and	an	unbelievably	sticky	resin	on	the	wide	end.	The	idea	is	you	have
the	valve	open	and	stick	the	wide	end	over	a	hole.	The	air	can	escape	through	the	valve,	so	it	doesn’t
interfere	with	the	resin	making	a	good	seal.	Then	you	close	the	valve,	and	you’ve	sealed	the	breach.
The	tricky	part	was	getting	the	antenna	out	of	the	way.	I	pulled	it	out	as	fast	as	I	could,	wincing	as
the	sudden	pressure	drop	dizzied	me	and	made	the	wound	in	my	side	scream	in	agony.
I	got	the	breach	kit	over	the	hole	and	sealed	it.	It	held.	The	suit	backfilled	the	missing	air	with	yet
more	oxygen.	Checking	my	arm	readouts,	I	saw	the	suit	was	now	at	85	percent	oxygen.	For	reference,
Earth’s	atmosphere	is	about	21	percent.	I’d	be	okay,	so	long	as	I	didn’t	spend	too	much	time	like	that.
I	stumbled	up	the	hill	back	toward	the	Hab.	As	I	crested	the	rise,	I	saw	something	that	made	me	very
happy	and	something	that	made	me	very	sad:	The	Hab	was	intact	(yay!)	and	the	MAV	was	gone	(boo!).
Right	that	moment	I	knew	I	was	screwed.	But	I	didn’t	want	to	just	die	out	on	the	surface.	I	limped
back	to	the	Hab	and	fumbled	my	way	into	an	airlock.	As	soon	as	it	equalized,	I	threw	off	my	helmet.
Once	inside	the	Hab,	I	doffed	the	suit	and	got	my	first	good	look	at	the	injury.	It	would	need
stitches.	Fortunately,	all	of	us	had	been	trained	in	basic	medical	procedures,	and	the	Hab	had	excellent
medical	supplies.	A	quick	shot	of	local	anesthetic,	irrigate	the	wound,	nine	stitches,	and	I	was	done.	I’d
be	taking	antibiotics	for	a	couple	of	weeks,	but	other	than	that	I’d	be	fine.
I	knew	it	was	hopeless,	but	I	tried	firing	up	the	communications	array.	No	signal,	of	course.	The
primary	satellite	dish	had	broken	off,	remember?	And	it	took	the	reception	antennae	with	it.	The	Hab
--- Page 13 ---
had	secondary	and	tertiary	communications	systems,	but	they	were	both	just	for	talking	to	the	MAV,
which	would	use	its	much	more	powerful	systems	to	relay	to	
Hermes
.	Thing	is,	that	only	works	if	the
MAV	is	still	around.
I	had	no	way	to	talk	to	
Hermes
.	In	time,	I	could	locate	the	dish	out	on	the	surface,	but	it	would	take
weeks	for	me	to	rig	up	any	repairs,	and	that	would	be	too	late.	In	an	abort,	
Hermes
	would	leave	orbit
within	twenty-four	hours.	The	orbital	dynamics	made	the	trip	safer	and	shorter	the	earlier	you	left,	so
why	wait?
Checking	out	my	suit,	I	saw	the	antenna	had	plowed	through	my	bio-monitor	computer.	When	on
an	EVA,	all	the	crew’s	suits	are	networked	so	we	can	see	each	other’s	status.	The	rest	of	the	crew
would	have	seen	the	pressure	in	my	suit	drop	to	nearly	zero,	followed	immediately	by	my	bio-signs
going	flat.	Add	to	that	watching	me	tumble	down	a	hill	with	a	spear	through	me	in	the	middle	of	a
sandstorm…yeah.	They	thought	I	was	dead.	How	could	they	not?
They	may	have	even	had	a	brief	discussion	about	recovering	my	body,	but	regulations	are	clear.	In
the	event	a	crewman	dies	on	Mars,	he	stays	on	Mars.	Leaving	his	body	behind	reduces	weight	for	the
MAV	on	the	trip	back.	That	means	more	disposable	fuel	and	a	larger	margin	of	error	for	the	return
thrust.	No	point	in	giving	that	up	for	sentimentality.
So	that’s	the	situation.	I’m	stranded	on	Mars.	I	have	no	way	to	communicate	with	
Hermes
	or	Earth.
Everyone	thinks	I’m	dead.	I’m	in	a	Hab	designed	to	last	thirty-one	days.
If	the	oxygenator	breaks	down,	I’ll	suffocate.	If	the	water	reclaimer	breaks	down,	I’ll	die	of	thirst.
If	the	Hab	breaches,	I’ll	just	kind	of	explode.	If	none	of	those	things	happen,	I’ll	eventually	run	out	of
food	and	starve	to	death.
So	yeah.	I’m	fucked.
--- Page 14 ---
CHAPTER	2
--- Page 15 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	7
Okay,	I’ve	had	a	good	night’s	sleep,	and	things	don’t	seem	as	hopeless	as	they	did	yesterday.
Today	I	took	stock	of	supplies	and	did	a	quick	EVA	to	check	up	on	the	external	equipment.	Here’s
my	situation:
The	surface	mission	was	supposed	to	be	thirty-one	days.	For	redundancy,	the	supply	probes	had
enough	food	to	last	the	whole	crew	fifty-six	days.	That	way	if	one	or	two	probes	had	problems,	we’d
still	have	enough	food	to	complete	the	mission.
We	were	six	days	in	when	all	hell	broke	loose,	so	that	leaves	enough	food	to	feed	six	people	for
fifty	days.	I’m	just	one	guy,	so	it’ll	last	me	three	hundred	days.	And	that’s	if	I	don’t	ration	it.	So	I’ve
got	a	fair	bit	of	time.
I’m	pretty	flush	on	EVA	suits,	too.	Each	crew	member	had	two	space	suits:	a	flight	spacesuit	to	wear
during	descent	and	ascent,	and	the	much	bulkier	and	more	robust	EVA	suit	to	wear	when	doing
surface	operations.	My	flight	spacesuit	has	a	hole	in	it,	and	of	course	the	crew	was	wearing	the	other
five	when	they	returned	to	
Hermes
.	But	all	six	EVA	suits	are	still	here	and	in	perfect	condition.
The	Hab	stood	up	to	the	storm	without	any	problems.	Outside,	things	aren’t	so	rosy.	I	can’t	find	the
satellite	dish.	It	probably	got	blown	kilometers	away.
The	MAV	is	gone,	of	course.	My	crewmates	took	it	up	to	
Hermes
.	Though	the	bottom	half	(the
landing	stage)	is	still	here.	No	reason	to	take	that	back	up	when	weight	is	the	enemy.	It	includes	the
landing	gear,	the	fuel	plant,	and	anything	else	NASA	figured	it	wouldn’t	need	for	the	trip	back	up	to
orbit.
The	MDV	is	on	its	side	and	there’s	a	breach	in	the	hull.	Looks	like	the	storm	ripped	the	cowling	off
the	reserve	chute	(which	we	didn’t	have	to	use	on	landing).	Once	the	chute	was	exposed,	it	dragged	the
MDV	all	over	the	place,	smashing	it	against	every	rock	in	the	area.	Not	that	the	MDV	would	be	much
use	to	me.	Its	thrusters	can’t	even	lift	its	own	weight.	But	it	might	have	been	valuable	for	parts.	Might
still	be.
Both	rovers	are	half-buried	in	sand,	but	they’re	in	good	shape	otherwise.	Their	pressure	seals	are
intact.	Makes	sense.	Operating	procedure	when	a	storm	hits	is	to	stop	motion	and	wait	for	the	storm	to
pass.	They’re	made	to	stand	up	to	punishment.	I’ll	be	able	to	dig	them	out	with	a	day	or	so	of	work.
I’ve	lost	communication	with	the	weather	stations,	placed	a	kilometer	away	from	the	Hab	in	four
directions.	They	might	be	in	perfect	working	order	for	all	I	know.	The	Hab’s	communications	are	so
weak	right	now	it	probably	can’t	even	reach	a	kilometer.
The	solar	cell	array	was	covered	in	sand,	rendering	it	useless	(hint:	solar	cells	need	sunlight	to
make	electricity).	But	once	I	swept	the	cells	off,	they	returned	to	full	efficiency.	Whatever	I	end	up
doing,	I’ll	have	plenty	of	power	for	it.	Two	hundred	square	meters	of	solar	cells,	with	hydrogen	fuel
cells	to	store	plenty	of	reserve.	All	I	need	to	do	is	sweep	them	off	every	few	days.
Things	indoors	are	great,	thanks	to	the	Hab’s	sturdy	design.
I	ran	a	full	diagnostic	on	the	oxygenator.	Twice.	It’s	perfect.	If	anything	goes	wrong	with	it,	there’s
a	short-term	spare	I	can	use.	But	it’s	solely	for	emergency	use	while	repairing	the	main	one.	The
spare	doesn’t	actually	pull	CO
2
	apart	and	recapture	the	oxygen.	It	just	absorbs	the	CO
2
	the	same	way
the	space	suits	do.	It’s	intended	to	last	five	days	before	it	saturates	the	filters,	which	means	thirty	days
for	me	(just	one	person	breathing,	instead	of	six).	So	there’s	some	insurance	there.
The	water	reclaimer	is	working	fine,	too.	The	bad	news	is	there’s	no	backup.	If	it	stops	working,
I’ll	be	drinking	reserve	water	while	I	rig	up	a	primitive	distillery	to	boil	piss.	Also,	I’ll	lose	half	a
liter	of	water	per	day	to	breathing	until	the	humidity	in	the	Hab	reaches	its	maximum	and	water	starts
--- Page 16 ---
condensing	on	every	surface.	Then	I’ll	be	licking	the	walls.	Yay.	Anyway,	for	now,	no	problems	with
the	water	reclaimer.
So	yeah.	Food,	water,	shelter	all	taken	care	of.	I’m	going	to	start	rationing	food	right	now.	Meals
are	pretty	minimal	already,	but	I	think	I	can	eat	a	three-fourths	portion	per	meal	and	still	be	all	right.
That	should	turn	my	three	hundred	days	of	food	into	four	hundred.	Foraging	around	the	medical	area,
I	found	the	main	bottle	of	vitamins.	There’s	enough	multivitamins	there	to	last	years.	So	I	won’t	have
any	nutritional	problems	(though	I’ll	still	starve	to	death	when	I’m	out	of	food,	no	matter	how	many
vitamins	I	take).
The	medical	area	has	morphine	for	emergencies.	And	there’s	enough	there	for	a	lethal	dose.	I’m
not	going	to	slowly	starve	to	death,	I’ll	tell	you	that.	If	I	get	to	that	point,	I’ll	take	an	easier	way	out.
Everyone	on	the	mission	had	two	specialties.	I’m	a	botanist	and	mechanical	engineer;	basically,	the
mission’s	fix-it	man	who	played	with	plants.	The	mechanical	engineering	might	save	my	life	if
something	breaks.
I’ve	been	thinking	about	how	to	survive	this.	It’s	not	completely	hopeless.	There’ll	be	humans	back
on	Mars	in	about	four	years	when	Ares	4	arrives	(assuming	they	didn’t	cancel	the	program	in	the
wake	of	my	“death”).
Ares	4	will	be	landing	at	the	Schiaparelli	crater,	which	is	about	3200	kilometers	away	from	my
location	here	in	Acidalia	Planitia.	No	way	for	me	to	get	there	on	my	own.	But	if	I	could	communicate,
I	might	be	able	to	get	a	rescue.	Not	sure	how	they’d	manage	that	with	the	resources	on	hand,	but
NASA	has	a	lot	of	smart	people.
So	that’s	my	mission	now.	Find	a	way	to	communicate	with	Earth.	If	I	can’t	manage	that,	find	a	way
to	communicate	with	
Hermes
	when	it	returns	in	four	years	with	the	Ares	4	crew.
Of	course,	I	don’t	have	any	plan	for	surviving	four	years	on	one	year	of	food.	But	one	thing	at	a
time	here.	For	now,	I’m	well	fed	and	have	a	purpose:	Fix	the	damn	radio.
--- Page 17 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	10
Well,	I’ve	done	three	EVAs	and	haven’t	found	any	hint	of	the	communications	dish.
I	dug	out	one	of	the	rovers	and	had	a	good	drive	around,	but	after	days	of	wandering,	I	think	it’s
time	to	give	up.	The	storm	probably	blew	the	dish	far	away	and	then	erased	any	drag-marks	or	scuffs
that	might	have	led	to	a	trail.	Probably	buried	it,	too.
I	spent	most	of	today	out	at	what’s	left	of	the	communications	array.	It’s	really	a	sorry	sight.	I	may
as	well	yell	toward	Earth	for	all	the	good	that	damned	thing	will	do	me.
I	could	throw	together	a	rudimentary	dish	out	of	metal	I	find	around	the	base,	but	this	isn’t	some
walkie-talkie	I’m	working	with	here.	Communicating	from	Mars	to	Earth	is	a	pretty	big	deal,	and
requires	extremely	specialized	equipment.	I	won’t	be	able	to	whip	something	up	with	tinfoil	and	gum.
I	need	to	ration	my	EVAs	as	well	as	food.	The	CO
2
	filters	are	not	cleanable.	Once	they’re	saturated,
they’re	done.	The	mission	accounted	for	a	four-hour	EVA	per	crew	member	per	day.	Fortunately,	CO
2
filters	are	light	and	small,	so	NASA	had	the	luxury	of	sending	more	than	we	needed.	All	told,	I	have
about	1500	hours’	worth	of	CO
2
	filters.	After	that,	any	EVAs	I	do	will	have	to	be	managed	with
bloodletting	the	air.
Fifteen	hundred	hours	may	sound	like	a	lot,	but	I’m	faced	with	spending	at	least	four	years	here	if
I’m	going	to	have	any	hope	of	rescue,	with	a	minimum	of	several	hours	per	week	dedicated	to
sweeping	off	the	solar	array.	Anyway.	No	needless	EVAs.
In	other	news,	I’m	starting	to	come	up	with	an	idea	for	food.	My	botany	background	may	come	in
useful	after	all.
Why	bring	a	botanist	to	Mars?	After	all,	it’s	famous	for	not	having	anything	growing	there.	Well,
the	idea	was	to	figure	out	how	well	things	grow	in	Martian	gravity,	and	see	what,	if	anything,	we	can
do	with	Martian	soil.	The	short	answer	is:	quite	a	lot…almost.	Martian	soil	has	the	basic	building
blocks	needed	for	plant	growth,	but	there’s	a	lot	of	stuff	going	on	in	Earth	soil	that	Mars	soil	doesn’t
have,	even	when	it’s	placed	in	an	Earth	atmosphere	and	given	plenty	of	water.	Bacterial	activity,
certain	nutrients	provided	by	animal	life,	etc.	None	of	that	is	happening	on	Mars.	One	of	my	tasks	for
the	mission	was	to	see	how	plants	grow	here,	in	various	combinations	of	Earth	and	Mars	soil	and
atmosphere.
That’s	why	I	have	a	small	amount	of	Earth	soil	and	a	bunch	of	plant	seeds	with	me.
I	can’t	get	too	excited,	however.	It’s	about	the	amount	of	soil	you’d	put	in	a	window	box,	and	the
only	seeds	I	have	are	a	few	species	of	grass	and	ferns.	They’re	the	most	rugged	and	easily	grown
plants	on	Earth,	so	NASA	picked	them	as	the	test	subjects.
So	I	have	two	problems:	not	enough	dirt,	and	nothing	edible	to	plant	in	it.
But	I’m	a	botanist,	damn	it.	I	should	be	able	to	find	a	way	to	make	this	happen.	If	I	don’t,	I’ll	be	a
really	hungry	botanist	in	about	a	year.
--- Page 18 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	11
I	wonder	how	the	Cubs	are	doing.
--- Page 19 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	14
I	got	my	undergrad	degree	at	the	University	of	Chicago.	Half	the	people	who	studied	botany	were
hippies	who	thought	they	could	return	to	some	natural	world	system.	Somehow	feeding	seven	billion
people	through	pure	gathering.	They	spent	most	of	their	time	working	out	better	ways	to	grow	pot.	I
didn’t	like	them.	I’ve	always	been	in	it	for	the	science,	not	for	any	New	World	Order	bullshit.
When	they	made	compost	heaps	and	tried	to	conserve	every	little	ounce	of	living	matter,	I	laughed
at	them.	“Look	at	the	silly	hippies!	Look	at	their	pathetic	attempts	to	simulate	a	complex	global
ecosystem	in	their	backyard.”
Of	course,	now	I’m	doing	exactly	that.	I’m	saving	every	scrap	of	biomatter	I	can	find.	Every	time	I
finish	a	meal,	the	leftovers	go	to	the	compost	bucket.	As	for	other	biological	material…
The	Hab	has	sophisticated	toilets.	Shit	is	usually	vaccum-dried,	then	accumulated	in	sealed	bags	to
be	discarded	on	the	surface.
Not	anymore!
In	fact,	I	even	did	an	EVA	to	recover	the	previous	bags	of	shit	from	before	the	crew	left.	Being
completely	desiccated,	this	particular	shit	didn’t	have	bacteria	in	it	anymore,	but	it	still	had	complex
proteins	and	would	serve	as	useful	manure.	Adding	it	to	water	and	active	bacteria	would	quickly	get	it
inundated,	replacing	any	population	killed	by	the	Toilet	of	Doom.
I	found	a	big	container	and	put	a	bit	of	water	in	it,	then	added	the	dried	shit.	Since	then,	I’ve	added
my	own	shit	to	it	as	well.	The	worse	it	smells,	the	better	things	are	going.	That’s	the	bacteria	at	work!
Once	I	get	some	Martian	soil	in	here,	I	can	mix	in	the	shit	and	spread	it	out.	Then	I	can	sprinkle	the
Earth	soil	on	top.	You	might	not	think	that	would	be	an	important	step,	but	it	is.	There	are	dozens	of
species	of	bacteria	living	in	Earth	soil,	and	they’re	critical	to	plant	growth.	They’ll	spread	out	and
breed	like…well,	like	a	bacterial	infection.
People	have	been	using	human	waste	as	fertilizer	for	centuries.	It’s	even	got	a	pleasant	name:	“night
soil.”	Normally,	it’s	not	an	ideal	way	to	grow	crops,	because	it	spreads	disease:	Human	waste	has
pathogens	in	it	that,	you	guessed	it,	infect	humans.	But	it’s	not	a	problem	for	me.	The	only	pathogens
in	this	waste	are	the	ones	I	already	have.
Within	a	week,	the	Martian	soil	will	be	ready	for	plants	to	germinate	in.	But	I	won’t	plant	yet.	I’ll
bring	in	more	lifeless	soil	from	outside	and	spread	some	of	the	live	soil	over	it.	It’ll	“infect”	the	new
soil	and	I’ll	have	double	what	I	started	with.	After	another	week,	I’ll	double	it	again.	And	so	on.	Of
course,	all	the	while,	I’ll	be	adding	all	new	manure	to	the	effort.
My	asshole	is	doing	as	much	to	keep	me	alive	as	my	brain.
This	isn’t	a	new	concept	I	just	came	up	with.	People	have	speculated	on	how	to	make	crop	soil	out
of	Martian	dirt	for	decades.	I’ll	just	be	putting	it	to	the	test	for	the	first	time.
I	searched	through	the	food	supplies	and	found	all	sorts	of	things	that	I	can	plant.	Peas,	for	instance.
Plenty	of	beans,	too.	I	also	found	several	potatoes.	If	
any
	of	them	can	still	germinate	after	their	ordeal,
that’ll	be	great.	With	a	nearly	infinite	supply	of	vitamins,	all	I	need	are	calories	of	any	kind	to	survive.
The	total	floor	space	of	the	Hab	is	about	92	square	meters.	I	plan	to	dedicate	all	of	it	to	this
endeavor.	I	don’t	mind	walking	on	dirt.	It’ll	be	a	lot	of	work,	but	I’m	going	to	need	to	cover	the	entire
floor	to	a	depth	of	10	centimeters.	That	means	I’ll	have	to	transport	9.2	cubic	meters	of	Martian	soil
into	the	Hab.	I	can	get	maybe	one-tenth	of	a	cubic	meter	in	through	the	airlock	at	a	time,	and	it’ll	be
backbreaking	work	to	collect	it.	But	in	the	end,	if	everything	goes	to	plan,	I’ll	have	92	square	meters
of	crop-able	soil.
Hell	yeah	I’m	a	botanist!	Fear	my	botany	powers!
--- Page 20 ---
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	15
Ugh!	This	is	backbreaking	work!
I	spent	twelve	hours	today	on	EVAs	to	bring	dirt	into	the	Hab.	I	only	managed	to	cover	a	small
corner	of	the	base,	maybe	five	square	meters.	At	this	rate	it’ll	take	me	weeks	to	get	all	the	soil	in.	But
hey,	time	is	one	thing	I’ve	got.
The	first	few	EVAs	were	pretty	inefficient;	me	filling	small	containers	and	bringing	them	in
through	the	airlock.	Then	I	got	wise	and	just	put	one	big	container	in	the	airlock	itself	and	filled	that
with	small	containers	till	it	was	full.	That	sped	things	up	a	lot	because	the	airlock	takes	about	ten
minutes	to	get	through.
I	ache	all	over.	And	the	shovels	I	have	are	made	for	taking	samples,	not	heavy	digging.	My	back	is
killing	me.	I	foraged	in	the	medical	supplies	and	found	some	Vicodin.	I	took	it	about	ten	minutes	ago.
Should	be	kicking	in	soon.
Anyway,	it’s	nice	to	see	progress.	Time	to	start	getting	the	bacteria	to	work	on	these	minerals.	After
lunch.	No	three-fourths	ration	today.	I’ve	earned	a	full	meal.